Go Switch Statement (#534)
Codecademy/docs: content/go/concepts/switch/switch.md

---
Title: 'Switch'
Description: 'A switch statement allows the selective execution of one out of several blocks of code based on the value of an expression.'
Subjects:
  - 'Code Foundations'
  - 'Computer Science'
Tags:
  - 'Comparison'
  - 'Control Flow'
  - 'Switch'
CatalogContent:
  - 'learn-go'
  - 'paths/back-end-engineer-career-path'
---

A `switch` statement allows the selective execution of one out of several blocks of code based on the value of an expression. It can be thought of as a expanded `if ... then ... else` statement, with many potential `then` clauses.

## Syntax 1

This is the typical `switch` statement syntax:

> ```pseudo

Reviewer: ^^^ I agree here, it seems like this is also the case on in Go's ref spec for switch expressions ([under "Expression switches"](https://go.dev/ref/spec#Switch_statements#Expression_switches)

The `switch` statement in Go differs from other languages like C++ and Java, in that the values used by the `case` statements need not be constants, they can be variables or full expressions. Also, unlike C++ and Java, in Go only the selected `case` statement block will be executed, so there is no need for a `break` statement.

## Syntax 2

The expression can be omitted after the `switch` and the `switch` behaves more like an `if ... then ... else` statement:

```pseudo
switch {
  case <expression 1>:
    <statements>
  case <expression 2>:
    <statements>
    .
    .
    .
  case <expression N>
    <statements>
  default:
    <statements>
}
```

In this example the first expression that evaluates true will execute the corresponding `case` `<statements>` block. Again, `default` is optional, and will execute its `<statements>` block if none of the `case` statements are executed.

This is equivalent to:

```pseudo
switch true { ... }
```

## Syntax 3

A given `case` statement can have more than one matching value, separated by commas:

```pseudo
switch <expression> {
  case <value 1>, <value 2>, ... <value N>:
    <statements>
    .
    .
    .
default:
  <statements>
}
```

> Values are compared left-to-right and top-to-bottom. The first one to match the `switch` expression determines the `case` `<statements>` block to be executed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Values are compared left-to-right and top-to-bottom. The first `case` block to match the `switch` expression will be executed.
```

## Examples

```go
i := 7
switch i % 2 {
  case 0:
     fmt.Printf("%d is even.\n",i)
  case 1:
     fmt.Printf("%d is odd.\n",i)

> }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
}

// Output: 7 is odd.
```

```

> ```go

Reviewer 2: This example might be useful as a codebyte, so the reader can see the output.
```suggestion
```codebyte/go
package main

import (
  "fmt"
  "time"
)
```

> switch time.Now().Weekday() {

Reviewer 2: adding main for codebyte
```suggestion
func main() {
  switch time.Now().Weekday() {
```

  case time.Saturday, time.Sunday:
    fmt.Println("It's the weekend")
  case time.Friday:
    fmt.Println("T.G.I.F.")
  default:
    fmt.Println("It's a weekday")

> }

Reviewer 2: function ending bracket for main 
```suggestion
  }
}
```

---
Title: 'Switch'
Description: 'A switch statement allows the selective execution of one of several blocks of code based on the value of an expression.'
Subjects:
  - 'Code Foundations'
  - 'Computer Science'
Tags:
  - 'Comparison'
  - 'Control Flow'
  - 'Switch'
CatalogContent:
  - 'learn-go'
  - 'paths/back-end-engineer-career-path'
---

> A `switch` statement allows the selective execution of one of several blocks of code based on the value of an expression. It can be thought of as an expanded `if ... then ... else` statement, with many potential `then` clauses.

Reviewer: Are we sure it's an `if...then...else` statement and not just `if..else`? I am searching the official Go docs and can't find that specific reference: https://go.dev/ref/spec#If_statements

Reviewer 2: I think you're right @Dusch4593 . They compare it to an `if...else` statement on their "A Tour of Go" webpage: https://go.dev/tour/flowcontrol/9#:~:text=A%20switch%20statement%20is%20a,all%20the%20cases%20that%20follow.

## Syntax 1

> This is the typical `switch` statement syntax:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are many syntaxes that be applied in the `switch` statement. Probably the more common one looks like this:
```

```pseudo
switch <expression> {
  case <value 1>:
    <statements>
  case <value 2>:
    <statements>
  .
  .
  .
  case <value N>:
    <statements>
  default:
    <statements>
}
```

> When `<expression>` is equal to the value of one of the `case` statements, the corresponding `<statements>` block is executed. If the `<expression>` matches none of the `case` values, then the optional `default` `<statements>` block is executed.

Reviewer: What happens if there is no `default` block? Will it cause an error or something?

> When `<expression>` is equal to the value of one of the `case` statements, the corresponding `<statements>` block is executed. If the `<expression>` matches none of the `case` values, then the optional `default` `<statements>` block is executed.

Reviewer: ~`default` `statements`~ -> `default statements`~

~`case` `statements`~ -> `case statements`~

> The `switch` statement in Go differs from other languages like C++ and Java, in that the values used by the `case` statements don't need to be constants, they can be variables or full expressions. Also, unlike in C ++ and Java, Go only executes the selected "case" statement block, so no "break" statement is needed.

Reviewer 3: Can we link to some of these: https://www.google.com/search?q=codecademy+docs+switch&oq=codecademy+docs+switch&aqs=chrome..69i57j69i60l2.9087j0j1&sourceid=chrome&ie=UTF-8

> The `switch` statement in Go differs from other languages like [C++](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/cpp/switch) and [Java](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/switch), in that the values used by the `case` statements don't need to be constants, they can be variables or full expressions. Also, unlike in C ++ and Java, Go only executes the selected "case" statement block, so no "break" statement is needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Go, the `switch` statement differs from other languages like [C++](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/cpp/switch) and [Java](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/switch) in that the values used by the `case` statements are not limited to constants. They can also be variables or full expressions. Additionally, Go only executes the selected `case <statements> block, so no "break" statement is needed.
```

> Additionally, Go only executes the selected `case <statements>` block, so no "break" statement is needed. 

Does this mean that Go will keep moving down the program and exit the switch statement after a case is selected?

Reviewer: Never mind just confirmed that's the case (yay Go Playground!)

## Syntax 2

> The expression can be omitted after the `switch` and the `switch` behaves more like an `if ... then ... else` statement:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The expression can be omitted after the `switch` making it behave more like an `if ... then ... else` statement:
```

> The expression can be omitted after the `switch` making it behave more like an `if ... then ... else` statement:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The expression after the `switch` can be omitted, making the `case`s behave more like `<expressions>` in `if... else` statements:
```

```pseudo
switch {
case <expression 1>:
  <statements>
case <expression 2>:
  <statements>
    .
    .
    .
case <expression N>
  <statements>
default:
  <statements>
}
```

> In this example, the first expression that evaluates true will execute the corresponding `case` `<statements>` block. Again, `default` is optional, and will execute its `<statements>` block if none of the `case` statements are executed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, the first `case <expression>` that evaluates to true will execute its corresponding `<statements>`. Again, the `default` block is optional, and will execute its `<statements>` if none of the `case` statements are executed.
```

This is equivalent to:

```pseudo
switch true { ... }
```

## Syntax 3

> A given `case` statement can have more than one matching value, separated by commas:

Reviewer: Is this only the case if we're working with a `switch <expression> {` as opposed to a regular `switch {`?

```pseudo
switch <expression> {
case <value 1>, <value 2>, ... <value N>:
  <statements>
    .
    .
    .
default:
  <statements>
}
```

Values are compared left-to-right and top-to-bottom. The first `case` block to match the `switch` expression will be executed.

## Examples

```go
i := 7
switch i % 2 {
case 0:
   fmt.Printf("%d is even.\n",i)
case 1:
   fmt.Printf("%d is odd.\n",i)
}

// Output: 7 is odd.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

## Codebyte Example

```

```codebyte/go
package main

import (
  "fmt"
  "time"
)

func main() {
  switch time.Now().Weekday() {
  case time.Saturday, time.Sunday:
    fmt.Println("It's the weekend")
  case time.Friday:
    fmt.Println("T.G.I.F.")
  default:
    fmt.Println("It's a weekday")
  }

> }

Reviewer: Could we separate the `switch` expression above it and into a variable?

```
func main() {
  today = time.Now().Weekday()
  
  switch today {
  case time.Saturday, time.Sunday:
    fmt.Println("It's the weekend")
  case time.Friday:
    fmt.Println("T.G.I.F.")
  default:
    fmt.Println("It's a weekday")
  }
}
```

Also, I noticed something weird when I add the line `fmt.Println(time.Now())`. This is what I get:

```
It's a weekday
2009-11-10 23:00:00 +0000 UTC m=+0.000000001
```

Weird, eh?

---
Title: 'Switch'
Description: 'A switch statement allows the selective execution of one of several blocks of code based on the value of an expression.'
Subjects:
  - 'Code Foundations'
  - 'Computer Science'
Tags:
  - 'Comparison'
  - 'Control Flow'
  - 'Switch'
CatalogContent:
  - 'learn-go'
  - 'paths/back-end-engineer-career-path'
---

A `switch` statement allows the selective execution of one of several blocks of code based on the value of an expression. It can be thought of as an expanded `if ... else` statement, with many potential `if` clauses.

## Syntax 1

> There are many syntaxes that can be used in the `switch` statement. The following is probably the most common syntax:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are many syntaxes that can be used in the `switch` statement. The following is probably the most common:
```

Reviewer: `switch` the last sentence for "The following are probably" and I think we got a deal! 😄

```pseudo
switch <expression> {

> case <value 1>:
>   <statements>
> case <value 2>:
>   <statements>
>   .
>   .
>   .
> case <value N>:
>   <statements>
> default:
>   <statements>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  case <value 1>:
    <statements>
  case <value 2>:
    <statements>
  .
  .
  .
  case <value N>:
    <statements>
  default:
    <statements>
```

Reviewer 3: whoops sorry about this, saw the proper reference

}
```

When `<expression>` is equal to the value of one of the case statements, the corresponding `<statements>` block is executed. If the `<expression>` matches none of the `case` values, then the optional `default` statements block is executed. If the `default` block is omitted, and none of the values are matched, none of the statements in the switch block are executed.

> In Go, the `switch` statement differs from other languages like [C++](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/cpp/switch) and [Java](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/switch) in that the values used by the `case` statements are not limited to constants. They can also be variables or full expressions. Additionally, Go only executes the selected `case <expressions>` block, or the `default` block, so no "break" statement is needed. Code execution automatically resumes after the `switch` statement.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In Go, the `switch` statement differs from other languages like [C++](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/cpp/switch) and [Java](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/switch) in that the values used by the `case` statements are not limited to constants. They can also be variables or full expressions. Additionally, Go only executes the selected `case <expressions>` block, or the `default` block, so no `break` statement is needed. Code execution automatically resumes after the `switch` statement.
```
